“paradigms.” These I take to be universally
recognized scientific achievements that for a time provide model problems and
solutions to a community of practitioners. 


scientific revolution alters the historical perspective of the community that
experiences it, then that change of perspective should affect the structure of
postrevolutionary textbooks and research publications. One such effect—a shift
in the distribution of the technical literature cited in the footnotes to research
reports—ought to be studied as a possible index to the occurrence of revolutions.


scientific
revolutions 
Each produced a consequent shift in the problems available for scientific
scrutiny and in the standards by which the profession determined what should
count as an admissible problem or as a legitimate problem-solution	



Aristotle’s Physica, Ptolemy’s Almagest,
Newton’s Principia and Opticks, Franklin’s Electricity, Lavoisier’s Chemistry,
and Lyell’s Geology—these and many other works served for a time implicitly to
define the legitimate problems and methods of a research field for succeeding
generations of practitioners. They were able to do so because they shared two
essential characteristics. Their achievement was sufficiently unprecedented to
attract an enduring group of adherents away from competing modes of scientific
activity. Simultaneously, it was sufficiently open-ended to leave all sorts of
problems for the redefined group of practitioners to resolve.
Achievements that share these two characteristics I shall henceforth refer to as
‘paradigms,’


The study of
paradigms, including many that are far more specialized than those named
illustratively above, is what mainly prepares the student for membership in the
particular scientific community with which he will later practice. Because he
there joins men who learned the bases of their field from the same concrete
models, his subsequent practice will seldom evoke overt disagreement over
fundamentals. 



History also suggests, however, some reasons for the difficulties encountered
on that road. In the absence of a paradigm or some candidate for paradigm, all of
the facts that could possibly pertain to the development of a given science are
likely to seem equally relevant. As a result, early fact-gathering is a far more
nearly random activity than the one that subsequent scientific development
makes familiar. Furthermore, in the absence of a reason for seeking some
particular form of more recondite information, early fact-gathering is usually
restricted to the wealth of data that lie ready to hand. The resulting pool of facts
contains those accessible to casual observation and experiment together with
some of the more esoteric data retrievable from established crafts like medicine,
calendar making, and metallurgy. 
< TOOLS >Because the crafts are one readily accessible source of facts that could not have been casually discovered, technology has
often played a vital role in the emergence of new sciences.


When the individual scientist can take a paradigm for granted, he need no longer,
in his major works, attempt to build his field anew, starting from first principles
and justifying the use of each concept introduced. Th



In a science, on the other hand, a paradigm is rarely
an object for replication. Instead, like an accepted judicial decision in the
common law, it is an object for further articulation and specification under new
or more string



paradigma -> scienza normale

These three classes of problems —determination of significant fact, matching
of facts with theory, and articulation of theory— exhaust, I think, the literature of
normal science, both empirical and theoretical.

No part of the aim of normal science is to call forth
new sorts of phenomena; indeed those that will not fit the box are often not seen
at all. Nor do scientists normally aim to invent new theories, and they are often
intolerant of those invented by others.1 Instead, normal-scientific research is
directed to the articulation of those phenomena and theories that the paradigm
already supplies.
some scientists have acquired great reputations, not from any novelty
of their discoveries, but from the precision, reliability, and scope of the methods
they developed for the redetermination of a previously known sort of fact.

- quali sono i fatti significativi
First is that class of facts
that the paradigm has shown to be particularly revealing of the nature of things.
By employing them in solving problems, the paradigm has made them worth
determining both with more precision and in a larger variety of situations.
esempio: per un certo tipo di critica testuale la materialità dell'oggetto non è importante, mentre per altri si

- la corrispondenza tra i fatti e la teoria
A second usual but smaller class of factual determinations is directed to those
facts that, though often without much intrinsic interest, can be compared directly
with predictions from the paradigm theory. 
esempio: la collazione automatica, permettendo di non scegliere un testo di base, produce risultati migliori - edizione in cui questo succede
esempio: l'analisi di big data ci permette di collegare la letteratura alla società - analisi in cui questo succede
< TOOLS >The existence of the paradigm sets the problem to be solved; often the
paradigm theory is implicated directly in the design of apparatus able to solve
the problem. 

- articolazione della teoria
It consists of empirical work undertaken
to articulate the paradigm theory, resolving some of its residual ambiguities and
permitting the solution of problems to which it had previously only drawn
attention.

